Title: None
Author: None
Description: None
Url: None
	Ants are eusocial insects of the family Formicidae and, along with the related wasps and bees, belong to the order Hymenoptera. Ants evolved from wasp-like ancestors in the Cretaceous period, about 99 million years ago and diversified after the rise of flowering plants. [4][5] They are easily identified by their elbowed antennae and the distinctive node-like structure that forms their slender waists.  
	Ants form colonies that range in size from a few dozen predatory individuals living in small natural cavities to highly organised colonies that may occupy large territories and consist of millions of individuals. Larger colonies consist mostly of sterile, wingless females forming castes of "workers", "soldiers", or other specialised groups. Nearly all ant colonies also have some fertile males called "drones" and one or more fertile females called "queens". The colonies are described as superorganisms because the ants appear to operate as a unified entity, collectively working together to support the colony. Ants thrive in most ecosystems and may form 15–25% of the terrestrial animal biomass.[8] Their success in so many environments has been attributed to their social organisation and their ability to modify habitats, tap resources, and defend themselves. Their long co-evolution with other species has led to mimetic, commensal, parasitic, and mutualistic relationships.[9]  
	Ant societies have division of labour, communication between individuals, and an ability to solve complex problems.[10] These parallels with human societies have long been an inspiration and subject of study. Some species are valued in their role as biological pest control agents.[11] Their ability to exploit resources may bring ants into conflict with humans, however, as they can damage crops and invade buildings. Some species, such as the red imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta), are regarded as invasive species, establishing themselves in areas where they have been introduced accidentally. The word "ant" is derived from ante, emete of Middle English which are derived from ǣmette of Old English, and is related to the dialectal Dutch emt and the Old High German āmeiza, hence the modern German Ameise. All of these words come from West Germanic *ēmaitijǭ, and the original meaning of the word was "the biter" (from Proto-Germanic *ai-, "off, away" + *mait- "cut").[13][14] The family name Formicidae is derived from the Latin formīca ("ant")[15] from which the words in other Romance languages, such as the Portuguese formiga, Italian formica, Spanish hormiga, Romanian furnică, and French fourmi are derived. Sanskrit vamrah, Latin formīca, Greek μύρμηξ mýrmēx, Old Church Slavonic mraviji, Old Irish moirb, Old Norse maurr, Dutch mier. The family Formicidae belongs to the order Hymenoptera, which also includes sawflies, bees, and wasps. Ants evolved from a lineage within the aculeate wasps, and a 2013 study suggests that they are a sister group of the Apoidea.[17] In 1966, E. Wilson and his colleagues identified the fossil remains of an ant (Sphecomyrma) that lived in the Cretaceous period. The specimen, trapped in amber dating back to around 92 million years ago, has features found in some wasps, but not found in modern ants.[18] Sphecomyrma possibly was a ground forager, while Haidomyrmex and Haidomyrmodes, related genera in subfamily Sphecomyrminae, are reconstructed as active arboreal predators.[19] Older ants in the genus Sphecomyrmodes have been found in 99 million year-old amber from Myanmar.[20][21] After the rise of flowering plants about 100 million years ago they diversified and assumed ecological dominance around 60 million years ago. [22][23][24][25] Some groups, such as the Leptanillinae and Martialinae, are suggested to have diversified from early primitive ants that were likely to have been predators underneath the surface of the soil. During the Cretaceous period, a few species of primitive ants ranged widely on the Laurasian supercontinent (the Northern Hemisphere). They were scarce in comparison to the populations of other insects, representing only about 1% of the entire insect population. By the Oligocene and Miocene, ants had come to represent 20–40% of all insects found in major fossil deposits. Genera surviving today comprise 56% of the genera in Baltic amber fossils (early Oligocene), and 92% of the genera in Dominican amber fossils (apparently early Miocene).[22][27]  
	The similarity of their social structure to that of ants is attributed to convergent evolution.[28] Velvet ants look like large ants, but are wingless female wasps.[29][30]  
	Ants are found on all continents except Antarctica, and only a few large islands, such as Greenland, Iceland, parts of Polynesia and the Hawaiian Islands lack native ant species.[32][33] Ants occupy a wide range of ecological niches and exploit many different food resources as direct or indirect herbivores, predators and scavengers. Their ecological dominance is demonstrated by their biomass: ants are estimated to contribute 15–20 % (on average and nearly 25% in the tropics) of terrestrial animal biomass, exceeding that of the vertebrates.[8]  
	Ants range in size from 0.75 to 52 millimetres (0.030–2.0 in),[34][35] the largest species being the fossil Titanomyrma giganteum, the queen of which was 6 centimetres (2.4 in) long with a wingspan of 15 centimetres (5.9 in).[36] Ants vary in colour; most ants are red or black, but a few species are green and some tropical species have a metallic lustre. More than 12,000 species are currently known (with upper estimates of the potential existence of about 22,000) (see the article List of ant genera), with the greatest diversity in the tropics. Online databases of ant species, including AntBase and the Hymenoptera Name Server, help to keep track of the known and newly described species.[37] The relative ease with which ants may be sampled and studied in ecosystems has made them useful as indicator species in biodiversity studies.[38][39]  
	Ants are distinct in their morphology from other insects in having elbowed antennae, metapleural glands, and a strong constriction of their second abdominal segment into a node-like petiole. The petiole forms a narrow waist between their mesosoma (thorax plus the first abdominal segment, which is fused to it) and gaster (abdomen less the abdominal segments in the petiole). The petiole may be formed by one or two nodes (the second alone, or the second and third abdominal segments).[40]  
	Like other insects, ants have an exoskeleton, an external covering that provides a protective casing around the body and a point of attachment for muscles, in contrast to the internal skeletons of humans and other vertebrates. Insects do not have lungs; oxygen and other gases, such as carbon dioxide, pass through their exoskeleton via tiny valves called spiracles. Insects also lack closed blood vessels; instead, they have a long, thin, perforated tube along the top of the body (called the "dorsal aorta") that functions like a heart, and pumps haemolymph toward the head, thus driving the circulation of the internal fluids. The nervous system consists of a ventral nerve cord that runs the length of the body, with several ganglia and branches along the way reaching into the extremities of the appendages.[41]  
	They also have three small ocelli (simple eyes) on the top of the head that detect light levels and polarization.[42] Compared to vertebrates, most ants have poor-to-mediocre eyesight and a few subterranean species are completely blind. However, some ants, such as Australia's bulldog ant, have excellent vision and are capable of discriminating the distance and size of objects moving nearly a metre away.[43]  
	Two antennae ("feelers") are attached to the head; these organs detect chemicals, air currents, and vibrations; they also are used to transmit and receive signals through touch. The head has two strong jaws, the mandibles, used to carry food, manipulate objects, construct nests, and for defence.[41] In some species, a small pocket (infrabuccal chamber) inside the mouth stores food, so it may be passed to other ants or their larvae.[44]  
	Queens shed their wings after the nuptial flight, leaving visible stubs, a distinguishing feature of queens. The metasoma (the "abdomen") of the ant houses important internal organs, including those of the reproductive, respiratory (tracheae), and excretory systems. Workers of many species have their egg-laying structures modified into stings that are used for subduing prey and defending their nests.[41]  
	In the colonies of a few ant species, there are physical castes—workers in distinct size-classes, called minor, median, and major workers. Such individuals are sometimes called "soldier" ants because their stronger mandibles make them more effective in fighting, although they still are workers and their "duties" typically do not vary greatly from the minor or median workers. In a few species, the median workers are absent, creating a sharp divide between the minors and majors.[45] Weaver ants, for example, have a distinct bimodal size distribution.[46][47] Some other species show continuous variation in the size of workers. The smallest and largest workers in Pheidologeton diversus show nearly a 500-fold difference in their dry-weights.[48] Workers cannot mate; however, because of the haplodiploid sex-determination system in ants, workers of a number of species can lay unfertilised eggs that become fully fertile, haploid males. The role of workers may change with their age and in some species, such as honeypot ants, young workers are fed until their gasters are distended, and act as living food storage vessels. [49] For instance, these replete workers develop in the North American honeypot ant Myrmecocystus mexicanus. Usually the largest workers in the colony develop into repletes; and, if repletes are removed from the colony, other workers become repletes, demonstrating the flexibility of this particular polymorphism. [50] This polymorphism in morphology and behaviour of workers initially was thought to be determined by environmental factors such as nutrition and hormones that led to different developmental paths; however, genetic differences between worker castes have been noted in Acromyrmex sp. [51] These polymorphisms are caused by relatively small genetic changes; differences in a single gene of Solenopsis invicta can decide whether the colony will have single or multiple queens. [52] The Australian jack jumper ant (Myrmecia pilosula) has only a single pair of chromosomes (with the males having just one chromosome as they are haploid), the lowest number known for any animal, making it an interesting subject for studies in the genetics and developmental biology of social insects. Ants develop by complete metamorphosis with the larva stages passing through a pupal stage before emerging as an adult. Food is given to the larvae by trophallaxis, a process in which an ant regurgitates liquid food held in its crop. Larvae, especially in the later stages, may also be provided solid food, such as trophic eggs, pieces of prey, and seeds brought by workers.  
	The pupa has the appendages free and not fused to the body as in a butterfly pupa.[55] The differentiation into queens and workers (which are both female), and different castes of workers, is influenced in some species by the nutrition the larvae obtain. Genetic influences and the control of gene expression by the developmental environment are complex and the determination of caste continues to be a subject of research.[56] Winged male ants, called drones, emerge from pupae along with the usually winged breeding females. Larvae and pupae need to be kept at fairly constant temperatures to ensure proper development, and so often, are moved around among the various brood chambers within the colony.[57]  
	An explanation for the sequence is suggested by the high casualties involved in foraging, making it an acceptable risk only for ants who are older and are likely to die soon of natural causes.[58][59]  
	Males, however, are more transitory, being quite short-lived and surviving for only a few weeks.[60] Ant queens are estimated to live 100 times as long as solitary insects of a similar size.[61]  
	Ants are active all year long in the tropics, but, in cooler regions, they survive the winter in a state of dormancy or inactivity. The forms of inactivity are varied and some temperate species have larvae going into the inactive state, (diapause), while in others, the adults alone pass the winter in a state of reduced activity.[62]  
	Females of many species are known to be capable of reproducing asexually through thelytokous parthenogenesis.[63] Secretions from the male accessory glands in some species can plug the female genital opening and prevent females from re-mating.[64] Most ant species have a system in which only the queen and breeding females have the ability to mate. Contrary to popular belief, some ant nests have multiple queens, while others may exist without queens. Workers with the ability to reproduce are called "gamergates" and colonies that lack queens are then called gamergate colonies; colonies with queens are said to be queen-right.[65]  
	If recognized as a mate, it will be carried to the queen to mate.[66] Males may also patrol the nest and fight others by grabbing them with their mandibles, piercing their exoskeleton and then marking them with a pheromone. Most ants are univoltine, producing a new generation each year.[68] During the species-specific breeding period, new reproductives, females, and winged males leave the colony in what is called a nuptial flight. The nuptial flight usually takes place in the late spring or early summer when the weather is hot and humid. Heat makes flying easier and freshly fallen rain makes the ground softer for mated queens to dig nests.[69] Males typically take flight before the females. Males then use visual cues to find a common mating ground, for example, a landmark such as a pine tree to which other males in the area converge. Females of some species mate with just one male but in others they may mate with as many as ten or more different males, storing the sperm in their spermathecae.[70]  
	The females can selectively fertilise future eggs with the sperm stored or lay unfertilized haploid eggs to produce workers. The first workers to hatch are weak and smaller than later workers, but they begin to serve the colony immediately. Species that have multiple queens may have a queen leaving the nest along with some workers to found a colony at a new site,[70] a process akin to swarming in honeybees.  
	Ants communicate with each other using pheromones, sounds, and touch.[71] The use of pheromones as chemical signals is more developed in ants, such as the red harvester ant, than in other hymenopteran groups. Since most ants live on the ground, they use the soil surface to leave pheromone trails that may be followed by other ants. In species that forage in groups, a forager that finds food marks a trail on the way back to the colony; this trail is followed by other ants, these ants then reinforce the trail when they head back with food to the colony. When the food source is exhausted, no new trails are marked by returning ants and the scent slowly dissipates. For instance, when an established path to a food source is blocked by an obstacle, the foragers leave the path to explore new routes. Successful trails are followed by more ants, reinforcing better routes and gradually identifying the best path.[72]  
	A crushed ant emits an alarm pheromone that sends nearby ants into an attack frenzy and attracts more ants from farther away. Several ant species even use "propaganda pheromones" to confuse enemy ants and make them fight among themselves.[73] Pheromones are produced by a wide range of structures including Dufour's glands, poison glands and glands on the hindgut, pygidium, rectum, sternum, and hind tibia.[61] Pheromones also are exchanged, mixed with food, and passed by trophallaxis, transferring information within the colony.[74] This allows other ants to detect what task group (e.g., foraging or nest maintenance) other colony members belong to.[75] In ant species with queen castes, when the dominant queen stops producing a specific pheromone, workers begin to raise new queens in the colony.[76]  
	Ants attack and defend themselves by biting and, in many species, by stinging, often injecting or spraying chemicals, such as formic acid in the case of formicine ants, alkaloids and piperidines in fire ants, and a variety of protein components in other ants. Bullet ants (Paraponera), located in Central and South America, are considered to have the most painful sting of any insect, although it is usually not fatal to humans. Fire ants, Solenopsis spp., are unique in having a venom sac containing piperidine alkaloids.[81] Their stings are painful and can be dangerous to hypersensitive people.[82]  
	Trap-jaw ants of the genus Odontomachus are equipped with mandibles called trap-jaws, which snap shut faster than any other predatory appendages within the animal kingdom.[83] One study of Odontomachus bauri recorded peak speeds of between 126 and 230 km/h (78 and 143 mph), with the jaws closing within 130 microseconds on average. The ants were also observed to use their jaws as a catapult to eject intruders or fling themselves backward to escape a threat.[83] Before striking, the ant opens its mandibles extremely widely and locks them in this position by an internal mechanism. Energy is stored in a thick band of muscle and explosively released when triggered by the stimulation of sensory organs resembling hairs on the inside of the mandibles. Trap-jaws also are seen in the following genera: Anochetus, Orectognathus, and Strumigenys,[83] plus some members of the Dacetini tribe,[84] which are viewed as examples of convergent evolution.  
	A Malaysian species of ant in the Camponotus cylindricus group has enlarged mandibular glands that extend into their gaster. When disturbed, workers rupture the membrane of the gaster, causing a burst of secretions containing acetophenones and other chemicals that immobilise small insect attackers. Suicidal defences by workers are also noted in a Brazilian ant, Forelius pusillus, where a small group of ants leaves the security of the nest after sealing the entrance from the outside each evening.[86]  
	Some worker ants maintain the hygiene of the colony and their activities include undertaking or necrophory, the disposal of dead nest-mates.[87] Oleic acid has been identified as the compound released from dead ants that triggers necrophoric behaviour in Atta mexicana[88] while workers of Linepithema humile react to the absence of characteristic chemicals (dolichodial and iridomyrmecin) present on the cuticle of their living nestmates to trigger similar behaviour.[89]  
	Nests may be protected from physical threats such as flooding and overheating by elaborate nest architecture.[90][91] Workers of Cataulacus muticus, an arboreal species that lives in plant hollows, respond to flooding by drinking water inside the nest, and excreting it outside.[92] Camponotus anderseni, which nests in the cavities of wood in mangrove habitats, deals with submergence under water by switching to anaerobic respiration.[93]  
	Many animals can learn behaviours by imitation, but ants may be the only group apart from mammals where interactive teaching has been observed. A knowledgeable forager of Temnothorax albipennis will lead a naive nest-mate to newly discovered food by the process of tandem running. The leader is acutely sensitive to the progress of the follower and slows down when the follower lags and speeds up when the follower gets too close.[94]  
	Controlled experiments with colonies of Cerapachys biroi suggest that an individual may choose nest roles based on her previous experience. An entire generation of identical workers was divided into two groups whose outcome in food foraging was controlled. As a result, members of the successful group intensified their foraging attempts while the unsuccessful group ventured out fewer and fewer times. A month later, the successful foragers continued in their role while the others had moved to specialise in brood care.[95]  
	Complex nests are built by many ant species, but other species are nomadic and do not build permanent structures. These nests may be found in the ground, under stones or logs, inside logs, hollow stems, or even acorns. The materials used for construction include soil and plant matter,[70] and ants carefully select their nest sites; Temnothorax albipennis will avoid sites with dead ants, as these may indicate the presence of pests or disease. The army ants of South America, such as the Eciton burchellii species, and the driver ants of Africa do not build permanent nests, but instead, alternate between nomadism and stages where the workers form a temporary nest (bivouac) from their own bodies, by holding each other together.[97]  
	Weaver ant (Oecophylla spp.) workers build nests in trees by attaching leaves together, first pulling them together with bridges of workers and then inducing their larvae to produce silk as they are moved along the leaf edges. Formica polyctena, among other ant species, constructs nests that maintain a relatively constant interior temperature that aids in the development of larvae. Some ant species, such as those that use natural cavities, can be opportunistic and make use of the controlled micro-climate provided inside human dwellings and other artificial structures to house their colonies and nest structures.[100][101]  
	Diurnal desert ants of the genus Cataglyphis such as the Sahara desert ant navigate by keeping track of direction as well as distance travelled. Distances travelled are measured using an internal pedometer that keeps count of the steps taken [107] and also by evaluating the movement of objects in their visual field (optical flow).[108] Directions are measured using the position of the sun.[109] They integrate this information to find the shortest route back to their nest.[110] Like all ants, they can also make use of visual landmarks when available [111] as well as olfactory and tactile cues to navigate.[112][113] Some species of ant are able to use the Earth's magnetic field for navigation.[114] The compound eyes of ants have specialised cells that detect polarised light from the Sun, which is used to determine direction.[115][116] These polarization detectors are sensitive in the ultraviolet region of the light spectrum.[117] In some army ant species, a group of foragers who become separated from the main column may sometimes turn back on themselves and form a circular ant mill. Other species of ants can form chains to bridge gaps over water, underground, or through spaces in vegetation. Some species also form floating rafts that help them survive floods.[121] These rafts may also have a role in allowing ants to colonise islands.[122] Polyrhachis sokolova, a species of ant found in Australian mangrove swamps, can swim and live in underwater nests. Like virtually all ants, they are eusocial, but their social behaviour is poorly developed compared to other species. Extreme specialists among these slave-raiding ants, such as the Amazon ants, are incapable of feeding themselves and need captured workers to survive.[125] Captured workers of the enslaved species Temnothorax have evolved a counter strategy, destroying just the female pupae of the slave-making Protomognathus americanus, but sparing the males (who don't take part in slave-raiding as adults).[126]  
	Ants identify kin and nestmates through their scent, which comes from hydrocarbon-laced secretions that coat their exoskeletons. Other species use pheromones to confuse the host ants or to trick them into carrying the parasitic queen into the nest. Ants form symbiotic associations with a range of species, including other ant species, other insects, plants, and fungi. Some arthropod species spend part of their lives within ant nests, either preying on ants, their larvae, and eggs, consuming the food stores of the ants, or avoiding predators. Some caterpillars produce vibrations and sounds that are perceived by the ants.[136] Other caterpillars have evolved from ant-loving to ant-eating: these myrmecophagous caterpillars secrete a pheromone that makes the ants act as if the caterpillar is one of their own larvae. Ants may obtain nectar from flowers such as the dandelion but are only rarely known to pollinate flowers.  
	This modification of the forest provides the ants with more nesting sites inside the stems of the Duroia trees.[139] Although some ants obtain nectar from flowers, pollination by ants is somewhat rare.[140] Some plants have special nectar exuding structures, extrafloral nectaries, that provide food for ants, which in turn protect the plant from more damaging herbivorous insects.[141] Species such as the bullhorn acacia (Acacia cornigera) in Central America have hollow thorns that house colonies of stinging ants (Pseudomyrmex ferruginea) who defend the tree against insects, browsing mammals, and epiphytic vines. Many tropical tree species have seeds that are dispersed by ants.[143] Seed dispersal by ants or myrmecochory is widespread and new estimates suggest that nearly 9% of all plant species may have such ant associations.[144][145] Some plants in fire-prone grassland systems are particularly dependent on ants for their survival and dispersal as the seeds are transported to safety below the ground. Some species specialise in preying on termites (Megaponera and Termitopone) while a few Cerapachyinae prey on other ants.[106] Some termites, including Nasutitermes corniger, form associations with certain ant species to keep away predatory ant species.[149] The tropical wasp Mischocyttarus drewseni coats the pedicel of its nest with an ant-repellent chemical.[150] It is suggested that many tropical wasps may build their nests in trees and cover them to protect themselves from ants. Flies in the Old World genus Bengalia (Calliphoridae) prey on ants and are kleptoparasites, snatching prey or brood from the mandibles of adult ants.[152] Wingless and legless females of the Malaysian phorid fly (Vestigipoda myrmolarvoidea) live in the nests of ants of the genus Aenictus and are cared for by the ants.[152]  
	South American poison dart frogs in the genus Dendrobates feed mainly on ants, and the toxins in their skin may come from the ants.[157]  
	In Central and South America, Eciton burchellii is the swarming ant most commonly attended by "ant-following" birds such as antbirds and woodcreepers.[158][159] This behaviour was once considered mutualistic, but later studies found the birds to be parasitic. These adaptations include long, sticky tongues to capture ants and strong claws to break into ant nests. Ants perform many ecological roles that are beneficial to humans, including the suppression of pest populations and aeration of the soil. In some parts of the world (mainly Africa and South America), large ants, especially army ants, are used as surgical sutures. The body is then cut off and the head and mandibles remain in place to close the wound.[163][164][165] The large heads of the soldiers of the leafcutting ant Atta cephalotes are also used by native surgeons in closing wounds.[166]  
	In South Africa, ants are used to help harvest rooibos (Aspalathus linearis), which are small seeds used to make a herbal tea. These tend to be island species that have evolved specialized traits and risk being displaced by introduced ant species. Wilson that the total number of individual ants alive in the world at any one time is between one and ten quadrillion (short scale) (i.e. In the Colombian department of Santander, hormigas culonas (roughly interpreted as "large-bottomed ants") Atta laevigata are toasted alive and eaten.[174]  
	In areas of India, and throughout Burma and Thailand, a paste of the green weaver ant (Oecophylla smaragdina) is served as a condiment with curry.[175] Weaver ant eggs and larvae, as well as the ants, may be used in a Thai salad, yam (Thai: ยำ), in a dish called yam khai mot daeng (Thai: ยำไข่มดแดง) or red ant egg salad, a dish that comes from the Issan or north-eastern region of Thailand. Some ant species are considered as pests, primarily those that occur in human habitations, where their presence is often problematic. Some species or genera commonly categorized as pests include the Argentine ant, pavement ant, yellow crazy ant, banded sugar ant, Pharaoh ant, carpenter ants, odorous house ant, red imported fire ant, and European fire ant. Some ants will raid stored food, others may damage indoor structures, some can damage agricultural crops directly (or by aiding sucking pests), and some will sting or bite.[12] The adaptive nature of ant colonies make it nearly impossible to eliminate entire colonies and most pest management practices aim to control local populations and tend to be temporary solutions. Ant populations are managed by a combination of approaches that make use of chemical, biological and physical methods. Ultraviolet vision was first discovered in ants by Sir John Lubbock in 1881.[177] Studies on ants have tested hypotheses in ecology and sociobiology, and have been particularly important in examining the predictions of theories of kin selection and evolutionarily stable strategies.[178] Ant colonies may be studied by rearing or temporarily maintaining them in formicaria, specially constructed glass framed enclosures.[179] Individuals may be tracked for study by marking them with dots of colours.[180]  
	The successful techniques used by ant colonies have been studied in computer science and robotics to produce distributed and fault-tolerant systems for solving problems, for example Ant colony optimization and Ant robotics. The sting of some species of Pseudomyrmex is claimed to give fever relief.[184] Ant bites are used in the initiation ceremonies of some Amazon Indian cultures as a test of endurance.[185][186]  
	Mark Twain wrote about ants in his 1880 book A Tramp Abroad.[187] Some modern authors have used the example of the ants to comment on the relationship between society and the individual. In more recent times, animated cartoons and 3-D animated films featuring ants have been produced including Antz, A Bug's Life, The Ant Bully, The Ant and the Aardvark, Ferdy the Ant and Atom Ant. Wilson wrote a short story, "Trailhead" in 2010 for The New Yorker magazine, which describes the life and death of an ant-queen and the rise and fall of her colony, from an ants' point of view.[188]  
	Ants also are quite popular inspiration for many science-fiction insectoids, such as the Formics of Ender's Game, the Bugs of Starship Troopers, the giant ants in the films Them. and Empire of the Ants, Marvel Comics' super hero Ant-Man, and ants mutated into super-intelligence in Phase IV. In computer strategy games, ant-based species often benefit from increased production rates due to their single-minded focus, such as the Klackons in the Master of Orion series of games or the ChCht in Deadlock II. These characters are often credited with a hive mind, a common misconception about ant colonies.[191]  
	"A formicine in New Jersey Cretaceous amber (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) and early evolution of the ants". "Rediscovery of the bizarre Cretaceous ant Haidomyrmex Dlussky (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), with two new species" (PDF). "Replete Caste Production and Allometry of Workers in the Honey Ant, Myrmecocystus mexicanus Wesmael (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)". "Behavioral flexibility of temporal sub-castes in the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, in response to food". Speculations on the evolution of eusociality in ants". In Snelling RR, Fisher BL, Ward PS. Advances in ant systematics (Hymenoptera: Formicidae): homage to E. O. Wilson – 50 years of contributions. Memoirs of the American Entomological Institute, 80 (PDF). American Entomological Institute. pp. 580–609. Retrieved 2015-12-13.  
	"Antennal olfactory sensitivity in response to task-related odours of three castes of the ant Atta mexicana (hymenoptera: formicidae)". "The Effect of Nest Moisture on Daily Temperature Regime in the Nests of Formica polyctena Wood Ants.". ^ Åkesson S, Wehner R (2002). "Visual navigation in desert ants Cataglyphis fortis: are snapshots coupled to a celestial system of reference?" (PDF). Journal of Experimental Biology. 205 (14): 1971–1978.  
